README.md, before:

# PmPy - Project Management in python

![Github Workflow Deploy Package](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/Project-PmPy/pmpy/python-publish.yml?label=deploy)
![Github Release Version](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/Project-PmPy/pmpy)
![Github Release Date](https://img.shields.io/github/release-date/project-pmpy/pmpy)
![PyPi Package Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pmpy)
![PyPi Package Downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/pmpy)
![Github License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/project-pmpy/pmpy)
![Github Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/project-pmpy/pmpy)
![Github Pull Requests](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-pr/project-pmpy/pmpy)

PmPy offers project management tools in python.

Subpackages:
- des (discrete event simulation)
- consim (continuous simulation), 
- abs (agent-based simulation)
- mcs (monte carlo simulation)
- dists (probability distributions) modules.
## Using Pmpy
Getting started quickly:
```
pip install pmpy
```
## Community
- [Github Discussions](https://github.com/project-pmpy/pmpy/discussions)

## Contributing back to PmPy
If you run into an issue, please file a new [issue](https://github.com/project-pmpy/pmpy/issues) for us to discuss. If possible, follow up with a pull request.

If you would like to add a feature, please reach out via [issue](https://github.com/project-pmpy/pmpy/issues). A feature is most likely to be added if you build it!

Commit message:

Reworked code structure and all can be imported directly from simpm module

README.md, after:

# SimPM - Simulation Tool in Project Management

![Github Workflow Deploy Package](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/Project-SimPM/SimPM/python-publish.yml?label=deploy)
![Github Release Version](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/Project-SimPM/SimPM)
![Github Release Date](https://img.shields.io/github/release-date/Project-SimPM/SimPM)
![PyPi Package Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/simpm)
![PyPi Package Downloads](https://img.shields.io/pypi/dm/simpm)
![Github License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/Project-SimPM/SimPM)
![Github Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Project-SimPM/SimPM)
![Github Pull Requests](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-pr/Project-SimPM/SimPM)

SimPM offers simulation tools in project management.

Subpackages:
- des (discrete event simulation)
- dists (probability distributions) modules

## Using SimPM
Getting started quickly:
```
pip install simpm
```
## Community
- [Github Discussions](https://github.com/Project-SimPM/SimPM/discussions)

## Contributing back to SimPM
If you run into an issue, please file a new [issue](https://github.com/Project-SimPM/SimPM/issues) for us to discuss. If possible, follow up with a pull request.

If you would like to add a feature, please reach out via [issue](https://github.com/Project-SimPM/SimPM/issues). A feature is most likely to be added if you build it!
